---
description: Writing & Notes from 2012
---

# Writing & Notes from 2012

## January 2012

### Early Abolitionism : Quakers II 

The Catholic Church issued bulls against 'unjust' forms of slavery in the 16th century. In the 17th century Jesuits forced an answer from the Inquisition \(1686\) on the morality of slave holding. The response stated that Slaveholders were obliged to free those 'unjustly enslaved'. However real organised moral questioning came at first from the Quakers. The Quakers developed a peculiar culture of perfectionist self-questioning for the individual twinned with a concern for maintaining a group consensus. At first individual Quakers who went too far in their condemnation of slavery were disowned by the community. Yet this did not prevent periodic exclamations of conscience from the likes of Elihu Coleman and William Edmundson 'who held that perpetual bondage was an "oppression of the mind"' . Quakers were also intimately linked with the early expansion of sugar cultivation and the African trade. Spiritual conscience conflicted with commercial exploitation.

In the 1730s the eccentric Quaker \index{Benjamin Lay}Benjamin Lay's 'All Slaveholders Apostates' \(Published by the way by Benjamin Franklin\) began to nudge the Quakers consciences further. Finally in 1757 the London Yearly Meeting of Quakers began the international process of prohibiting Quaker involvement in Slavery. Philadelphia followed in 1758 and New England in 1760. \(See David Brion Davies's 'The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture', Chapter 10 Quakers and the Sectarian Tradition, OUP, 1966 for more details.\) So the moral problem was addressed by some prior to the evangelicals, albeit in a localised way. The Papal Bull referred to is the Sublimus Dei of 1537 and was reactive in following the Spanish King's prohibition of enslaving 'Indians' \(Native Americans\). The Jesuits in question were of the so-called Jesuit Reductions, self-contained 'Indian' \(Native American\) communities organised and led by Jesuits. These communities occurred in parts of what is now Paraguay, Argentina, Brazil and Bolivia. The Jesuits armed their 'Indian' communities against slave-trading pirates and sought theological justification from the Inquisition \(1686\). I came across these examples in a preamble somewhere, however as they are highly localised they do not bear much on the development of a unified moral opposition to Slavery, in my view. The Catholic Church \(and indeed established Protestant Churches\) continued to justify slavery on the 'man's place in the universe' argument well into the 18th century. The Quakers do demand particular note because they were the first Western community to "abolish" slavery. They also represent that non-conformist shift from 'Obedience to Church authority' to obeying 'inward testimony' \(or conscience\). The nature of the Quaker community is interesting too, where each member speaks their testimony to God at meetings and where a spiritual consensus is sought. This meant once one Quaker meeting condemned Slavery they were all required to. Ironically the arguments of many Rationalist Enlightenment thinkers could be \(and were\) used to justify Slavery. The great moral weakness of the Rational Enlightenment is also one of its strengths ... the questioning of a supreme moral authority. Christian reformers had the advantage of moral certainty based on the absolute authority of God \(speaking through conscience\) however retrograde that might be.

I think this is more 'background' for the essay rather than directly relevant. I suppose what is at issue is what was Mungo Park's world view ? The trans-atlantic trade seems to me more straightforward to condemn, because it was within the West's moral compass and control. Slavery within Africa is ambiguous, there is a danger of projecting 'our' moral standards onto the issue. History, in my view, is not consistent morally.

### The eccentric Benjamin Lay 

This is a précis of \index{David Brion Davis}David Brion Davis's account of Benjamin Lay from 'The problem of Slavery in Western Culture', pgs. 321-325, OUP, 1966. I had never heard of this character before and thought I'd share this summary. Benjamin Lay was born a hunchback to poor Quaker parents in Colchester circa 1681. They 'bound him out' to a glovemaker, but he shortly became a sailor \(1710\). He witnessed the 'relative mildness' of 'Moslem' slavery in Turkey and compared this to the cruelty of his shipmates tales of the African Trade. He returned to England and married a hunchbacked woman called Sarah. He incited 'public disturbances' at Quaker meetings in England and also disrupted Baptist and Presbyterian services. When he decided to emigrate to America the relieved Colchester Quakers issued him a membership certificate to present at Philadelphia. However this was withdrawn before he left for his "contentious conduct" !

Benjamin and Sarah Lay briefly stopped over in Barbados where they ran a food store. Here they witnessed the desperation of 'starving Negroes' rushing for the garbage Sarah threw in the street. After witnessing the public torture of an escaped Slave \(hanging in front of a Quaker House\) the cruelties of Barbados became too much for them. Upon arrival in Philadelphia the Lays found 'that even there the evil had taken root'. Lay despised polite addresses, once when addressed as "your humble servant" he retorted "... if thou are my humble servant, clean my shoes". He insisted on only travelling by foot, wore home-made clothes and was a strict vegetarian. He once made a public exhibition of smashing Sarah's tea cups to protest the use of sugar, this resulted in the crowd " running off with much of their china". "He went to Quaker meeting clothed in sackcloth, denounced the wealthy slave masters. In winter he sat outside a meetinghouse ... bare in the snow ... when people expressed concern ... he asked them why they were blind to the sufferings of their scantily clad Negroes. When ejected from a meetinghouse, he lay in front of the door in the rain and made the congregation step over his body. He supposedly kidnapped the child of a slave owner, in order to show the father ...how it felt to have a child taken away. " \(p.323-324, Davies, 1966\) After Sarah's death in 1735 Benjamin became "increasingly isolated" and "lived in a cave like dwelling in country, cultivating his garden and writing tracts against slavery ..." His most famous work 'All Slave-Keepers Apostates' completely lacked any order when Lay gave it to the publisher Benjamin Franklin. Franklin pointed this out and Lay replied that he could "print the pages in any order he chose.". Benjamin Lay who described himself as "a poor common Sailor, and an illiterate Man" died in 1760.

